All information accessible on r/OCD. Retrieved on 26 Mar, 2025 

OCD : Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
A subreddit dedicated to discussion, articles, and support regarding OCD. Please read below for more information and resources about about OCD and the subreddit.
Created Mar 30, 2009
Public

r/OCD Wiki
Welcome to the /r/OCD wiki.

This page will act as a running index of completed Wiki pages.

What is OCD?
Obsessive Compulsive Disorder (OCD) is an anxiety disorder characterized by two components: obsessions and compulsions. Obsessions are unwanted distressing intrusive thoughts. These thoughts cause intense discomfort and distress. Compulsions are repetitive behaviours and actions, both physical and mental, that one does with the aim of reducing the anxiety and distress caused by obsessions. For some individuals, compulsions primarily take the form of rumination or repetitively thinking about, trying to fix, trying to solve, or trying to otherwise break down and do something with the original intrusive thought.

Intrusive thoughts and compulsions vary from person to person but tend to fall into one of the following categories: contamination and cleaning, symmetry, forbidden and taboo thoughts, and harm.

Common examples of compulsions: counting, excessive washing and cleaning, repeated checking, repeating tasks excessively, asking for reassurance, reordering items and things around you. See Common Obsessions & Compulsions (http://www.reddit.com/r/OCD/wiki/Symptoms). Compulsions are completed with the expectation of relief from the distress caused by the intrusive thoughts. However, they do not lead to lasting relief and the individual performing them does not find the compulsion pleasurable.

Everybody experiences intrusive thoughts. The primary difference between someone with OCD and a person without is that a person without OCD will be able to either completely ignore the intrusive thought or acknowledge it and never think of it again. People with OCD have an intrusive thought and are unable to ignore that thought and the thought often repeats causing even more distress. The thoughts begin to interfere with daily functioning and cause a lot of discomfort.Individuals with OCD are typically aware that their obsessions and compulsions are irrational, yet are unable to stop engaging in them due to the amount of distress caused.

OCD shares traits with several other disorders including ADHD, Autism Spectrum Disorders, and General Anxiety Disorder so a proper differential diagnosis is required to determine whether or not a person truly has OCD. is often confused with Obsessive Compulsive Personality Disorder (OCPD) (http://www.reddit.com/r/OCD/wiki/OCPD).
Last revised by Froidinslip 2 years ago

What do I do if I think I might have OCD?
You are not alone, and there are many resources available to you!

You should first seek a referral to a psychiatrist or therapist to have your symptoms investigated and have a diagnosis made. Your general medical practitioner should be able to refer you to a specialist. A diagnosis is made after a thorough assessment regarding your symptoms and their severity.

You may not have OCD, and an official diagnosis is the only way to be sure of what you are suffering from and to pursue treatment. Other disorders with similar symptoms include Obsessive Compulsive Personality Disorder, autism spectrum disorders, ADHD, PTSD, BDD, and several others.

Once you are diagnosed, you and your specialist will review treatment options and get you started on a treatment regime that is appropriate for your case.

There are many things you can do in the meantime to improve your understanding of the condition. Recommended Reading (http://www.reddit.com/r/OCD/wiki/reading) lists some excellent books on OCD and Cognitive Behavioural Therapy. You can also reach out to communities that can help you through treatment, such as this subreddit and our discord (https://discord.gg/qFfXeaSu23)
Last revised by Froidinslip 2 years ago

Avoiding Reassurance and Providing Helpful Support
People with OCD of all forms are naturally compelled to seek reassurance that their obsessions are unfounded, or that their compulsions are unnecessary. For instance, someone with contamination fears will seek reassurance that they aren’t dirty, or that the amount of cleaning/washing they are doing is adequate to clear any contaminants. This is something we see very often on the subreddit.

The truth about seeking reassurance, and, more importantly, receiving reassurance, is that it is harmful, and interferes with your recovery. Reassurance provides a short term reduction in anxiety, but in the long term it validates the obsession. Reassurance seeking is a compulsion, and should be treated like one. Enabling compulsions does not make it easier to deal with the obsession - it allows the obsession to grow deeper roots in one’s mind.

It’s for this reason that reassurance seeking and providing reassurance are discouraged on r/OCD. Although it can feel like you’re being helpful and kind, giving reassurance to someone with OCD is like giving a recovering alcoholic a fifth of vodka for Christmas.

Another thing that falls into the same territory as reassurance is enabling. Enabling means providing someone with OCD the means to engage in their compulsions or obsessive thoughts with less outward harm. An example that we see occasionally is suggesting that someone with handwashing compulsions should purchase softer, less irritating soap. Enabling a compulsion is problematic in two ways: it validates the compulsion, since it fails to address the obsessive cause of it, and it allows the person with OCD to engage in compulsions more frequently and with less motivation to fight them.

So, how can we support people with OCD without providing reassurance or enabling their OCD? It’s harder, and less obvious, but there are ways to help someone through an obsessive episode without validating their obsessions.

Have the person properly identify the obsession driving their compulsion. In clear terms, what is this person afraid of happening, and what do they believe is the solution? By expressing these thoughts externally, it makes it easier for one to identify the flaws in the logic of their obsession. It also makes it clear to all parties how you can address the obsession without defaulting to reassurance.
Address requests for reassurance by clearly stating why you won’t provide it. “I think you’re asking for reassurance. Remember, reassurance is not helpful, it’s harmful. Therefore I’m not going to answer,” is infinitely more helpful than responding with statistics about germ transference, or whatever else.
Focus on preventing compulsive responses to obsessions. An exposure response is the compulsive action a person with OCD takes to attempt to relieve the anxiety caused by exposure to an obsession. In some cases this is a clear-cut compulsion, while in others it can take the form of rumination, mental compulsions, isolation, etc. Find out what response the person is taking to their obsession, and try to stop the cycle at that stage.
Be kind, compassionate, and respectful. Reassurance is not the only way you can help someone. Share similar experiences and how you overcame them. Be respectful of boundaries - not everyone with OCD can stop a compulsion cold-turkey without having a panic attack. Take small, firm steps, and be aware of how the person responds to them.
Assist them in seeking professional treatment if possible. Do they have a therapist and/or psychiatrist? If possible, try to give them a push towards treatment if they haven’t already pursued it. You can’t cure their OCD, but you can help them through an episode.
Sources and Further Reading

OCD Center of LA on reassurance seeking. (http://ocdla.com/reassurance-seeking-ocd-anxiety-1952)

PsychCentral on reassurance and OCD. (http://psychcentral.com/lib/ocd-and-the-need-for-reassurance/)

AnxietyBC on addressing reassurance seeking. (http://www.anxietybc.com/parenting/how-address-excessive-reassurance-seeking)

IOCDF on self-directed treatment. (https://iocdf.org/expert-opinions/expert-opinion-self-directed-erp/)

WHEN REASSURANCE IS HARMFUL By Paul R. Munford, Ph.D. (https://accounseling.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/When-Reassurance-is-Harmful.pdf)

Reassurance as a compulsion. (http://cognitivebehavioralstrategies.com/seeking-reassurance-an-often-unrecognized-compulsion/#.VaQbbJNViko)
Last revised by Froidinslip 3 months ago

OCD Treatment Options
There are two treatment paths that are pursued by most people with OCD: behavioural therapy and medication.

Therapy

The form of therapy shown to be most effective at combatting OCD is a form of Cognitive Behavioural Therapy (CBT) known as Exposure Response Prevention (ERP).

CBT is a type of psychotherapy based on behavioural and cognitive principles, which work to solve problems with thinking and behaviour. CBT is used to treat many mental illnesses, including depression, anxiety, eating disorders, OCD, psychosis, and substance abuse.

ERP, as the name suggests, focuses on preventing the compulsive or obsessive response to a patient’s exposure to a trigger. An example of ERP for a patient with contamination-related obsessions would be to have them touch a toilet seat then avoid washing their hands. Simultaneously, the patient and therapist monitor the anxiety produced by this action over several minutes or hours. As time goes on, the anxiety subsides naturally, without having to engage in the exposure response. As therapy progresses, the anxiety produced by this exposure reduces, and the patient is increasingly able to ignore their obsessive thoughts. Similar scenarios can take place for any form of OCD or Pure-O.

See Finding a Therapist.

 

Medication

Medication is another form of treatment. It’s important to note that medication for the majority of patients is not a cure-all; OCD medications help relieve symptoms and reduce anxiety, but a form of CBT is recommended for overcoming the condition at its core. Medication allows many patients the push and anxiety reduction they need to be able to effectively pursue therapy.

Several forms of medication are prescribed for OCD. See the Medication List for a more in-depth exploration of medication types and specific medications.

The most common medications for OCD are Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors (SSRIs), a form of antidepressant medication.

Other non-SSRI antidepressants are also frequently used both independent of and in cooperation with SSRIs. These work in similar ways to improve concentration of critical neurotransmitters to improve mood and anxieties. Antidepressants, for the most part, work by changing the way your body reabsorbs and produces certain neurotransmitters associated with mental illness. Depending on your medication, they may increase concentrations of serotonin, norepinephrine, and/or dopamine. These changes occur gradually over several weeks.

Other drugs not classified as antidepressants can also help combat the symptoms of OCD. Benzodiazepines and similar drugs are used primarily to fight General Anxiety Disorder and panic disorders, and are also useful for many patients with OCD. These anti-anxiety drugs are faster acting and have a more pronounced effect on mood.

You must work with your doctor to find the medication plan that works for you, and in many cases this is a long process of trial and error. All medications work differently on different people.

 

For many people, the most effective treatment plan includes both ERP therapy and medication. There are other patients who are more successful with one or the other, but a psychiatrist will typically recommend a mix of both treatment options.
Last revised by deleted account 10 years ago

Finding a Therapist
Finding a CBT/ERP or other type of therapist in your area is easier said than done. Your goal should be to find a therapist who specializes in treating OCD. Any therapist is, for the most part, better than no therapist, but a specialist is ideal for successful treatment. Your doctor will often have experience with many therapists in your area, and it’s best to first talk to whoever made your diagnosis to hear their suggestions. They may also be able to get you a referral to a specialist who may otherwise be fully booked. But in many cases you’re unfortunately on your own in finding a suitable therapist.

Psychology Today (https://therapists.psychologytoday.com/rms/prof_search.php) is an excellent resource for finding therapists in North America. This site has tools for easily narrowing your search to specifics, like “Male therapist who specializes in CBT for adolescents, speaks Spanish, and has experience treating OCD.” Once again, ideally your choice will have OCD not only listed as one of many issues they will treat, but also as a specialty. Many therapists accept various kinds of insurance, and many more have a sliding cost scale based on your needs.
Last revised by deleted account 10 years ago                      

Common Obsessions and Compulsions

Primarily Obsessive OCD (Pure-O)

Academic Study Rules

OCD Medication Master List

Obsessive Compulsive Personality Disorder

Recommended Reading
